.de EX
.sp
.in +5
.nf
.ft CW
..
.de EE
.in -5
.ft R
.sp
.fi
..
.TH "DVIPDFMX" "1" "15 July 2014"
.SH NAME
dvipdfmx, xdvipdfmx, dvipdfm \- produce PDF files directly from DVI files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dvipdfmx
or
.B dvipdfm
.RI [ options ]
.I file\c
.RB [ .dvi ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The program
.B dvipdfmx
generates a PDF file from a DVI file.  DVI files are the output produced
by TeX.
.B groff
can also generate DVI files using
.BR grodvi (-Tdvi).

In TeX Live,
.B dvipdfm
is another incarnation of
.B dvipdfmx
rather than a separate program.  Compatibility is attempted as best as
possible.  

In addition,
.B xdvipdfmx
is yet another incarnation.  It is used as the back end for
.BR xetex (1)
and is not intended to be invoked directly.

.B dvipdfmx
recognizes several commonly used
.BR \especial
commands, which are extensions to the DVI format.  Specifically, it
understands color specials, papersize specials, tpic specials (which
allow it to be used with
.BR pic ),
hypertex specials, and some PostScript specials.  These extensions allow
documents to contain color, figures, and hyperlinks.  The program tries
to mimic the behavior of
.B dvips
where possible, so that many macro packages produced for use with
.B dvips
will also work with 
.B dvipdfmx.
In addition,
.b Dvipdfmx 
understands its own specific
.B \especial
commands to allow access to PDF features such as annotations and
bookmarks.

Unrecognized specials will generate warning messages. Packages that may need a 
.B dvipdfm 
or
.B dvipdfmx 
driver option include 
.I geometry,
.I hyperref,
.I bookmark,
.I graphicx,
and
.I xcolor.

For issues related to bounding boxes (and hence image sizes), see
.BR extractbb (1).
.SH OPTIONS
Unlike with many other programs, argument values must be separated from
option names by a space, not an = sign; option names cannot be
abbreviated; and \- and \-\- cannot be used interchangeably.
.TP 5
.B \-\^c
Ignore (or accept) color
.BR \especials .
By default, color
.BR \especial "s"
are interpreted normally (changeable in the configuration file).  The
.B \-\^c
option may be used to produce a black and white document
from a document containing color TeX
.B \especial
commands.
.TP 5
.B \-\-\^dvipdfm
Enable
.B dvipdfm
emulation mode.  This is the default if the executable name is `dvipdfm'.
.TP 5
.B \-\^d number
Specify the number of decimal digits in the PDF output; must be between
0 and 5, default is 2.
.TP 5
.B \-\^e
Ignored, for (semi-)compatibility with
.BR dvipdfm .
.TP 5
.B \-\^f map_file
Read the font map file given by
.IR map_file .
The default map file in TeX Live is
.IR pdftex.map ,
as defined in the configuration file.
.B \-\-\^help
Show a help message and exit successfully.
.TP 5
.B \-\^l
Select landscape mode.  In other words, exchange the 
.I x
and
.I y
dimensions of the paper.
.TP 5
.B \-\^m " mag"
Magnify the input document by
.IR mag .
.TP 5
.B \-\^o " filename"
Set the PDF output file name; use `-' for stdout.
By default, the name of the output
file is derived from the input, that is,
.IR file .pdf.
.TP 5
.B \-\^p " paper"
Select the papersize by name (e.g.,
.BR letter ", " legal ", " ledger ", " tabloid ", " a3 ", " a4 ", or " a5
)
.TP 5
.B \-\^q
Quiet mode.
.TP 5
.B \-\^r " size"
Set resolution of bitmapped fonts to
.B size
dots per inch.  Bitmapped fonts are generated
by the Kpathsea library, which uses Metafont.  Bitmapped
fonts are included as Type 3 fonts in the PDF output file.  Default is 600.
.TP 5
.B \-\^s " page_specifications"
Select the pages of the DVI file to be processed; default is `-',
meaning all pages.  The
.I page_specifications
consists of a comma separated list of
.IR page_ranges :
.EX
.IR "page_specifications := page_specification" "[," page_specifications "]"
.EE
where
.EX
.IR "page_specification := single_page" | page_range
.IR "page_range := " [ first_page ]\^\-\^[ last_page ]
.EE
An empty
.I first_page
is treated as the first page of the DVI file, and
an empty
.I last_page
is treated as the last page of the DVI file.

Examples:
.RS
.TP 5
.B "\-\^s 1,3,5"
includes pages 1, 3, and 5;
.TP 5
.B "\-\^s \-"
includes all pages;
.TP 5
.B "\-\^s \-,\-"
includes two copies of all pages in the DVI file;
and
.TP 5
.B "\-\^s 1\-10"
includes the first ten pages of the DVI
file.
.RE
.TP 5
.B \-\^t
Search for thumbnail images of each page
in the directory named by the
.B TMPDIR
environment variable.  The thumbnail images must be named in a specific
format: the same base name as the DVI file and the page number as the
extension to the file name.
.B dvipdfmx
does not generate such thumbnails itself, but it is distributed with a
wrapper program named
.B dvipdft 
that does so.
.TP 5
.B \-\-\^version
Show a help message and exit successfully.
.TP 5
.B \-\^v 
Increase verbosity.
Results of the 
.B \-\^v
option are cumulative (e.g., 
.B \-\^vv
increases the verbosity by two increments).  Maximum verbosity is four.
.TP 5
.B \-\-\^kpathsea-debug number
Have Kpathsea output debugging information; `-1' for everything (voluminous).
.TP 5
.B \-\^x x_offset
Set the left margin to 
.IR x_offset .
The default left margin is
.BR 1.0in .
The dimension may be specified in any units understood by TeX (e.g.,
.BR bp ", " pt ", " in ", " cm ).
.TP 5
.B \-\^y y_offset
Set the top margin to 
.IR y_offset .
The default top margin is
.BR 1.0in .
The dimension may be specified in any units understood by TeX (e.g.,
.BR bpt ", " pt ", " in ", " cm ).
.TP 5
.B \-\^z number
Set the compression level to 
.IR compression_level .
Compression levels range from 0 (no compression) to
9 (maximum compression) and correspond to the values understood by zlib;
default is 9.
.TP 5
.B \-\^C number
Miscellaneous option flags; see the --help output for details.
.TP 5
.B \-\^D template
PostScript to PDF conversion command line template; the default is taken
from the configuration file, which also gives all the details and
mentions several possibilities.
.TP 5
.B \-\^E
Always try to embed fonts, ignoring licensing flags, etc.
.TP 5
.B \-\^I number
Image cache life in hours; default is -2, meaning to not cache images at
all.  A value of -1 means to erase all old images and also new images; 0
means to erase all old images but leave new images.
.TP 5
.B \-\^K number
Encryption key length; default 40.
.TP 5
.B \-\^M
Process MetaPost PostScript output.
.TP 5
.B \-\^O number
Set maximum depth of open bookmark items; default 0.
.TP 5
.B \-\^P number
Set permission flags for PDF encryption; default 0x003C.
.TP 5
.B \-\^S
Enable PDF encryption.
.TP 5
.B \-\^V number
Set PDF minor version; default 5 (from the configuration file).
.SH "IMAGE BOUNDING BOXES"
When including images with 
.BR dvipdfmx ,
their bounding boxes should be generated by running
.BR extractbb .
The result will be in an
.B .xbb
file; the xbb information is the same as for the PDF format.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B dvipdfmx 
uses the
.B kpathsea
library for locating the files that it opens.  Hence, the environment
variables documented in the
.I Kpathsea library
documentation influence
.BR dvipdfmx .
It also uses the value of the environment variable TMPDIR as the
directory to search for thumbnail images of each page.
.SH FILES
The precise location of the following files is determined by the
.I Kpathsea library
configuration.  The location may be determined by using kpsewhich, e.g.,
.nf
.B kpsewhich \-progname=dvipdfmx \-format='other text files' dvipdfmx.cfg
.fi
.TP 5
.I dvipdfmx.cfg
Default configuration file
.TP 5
.I pdftex.map
The default font map file (this may be changed in the config file).
.TP 5
.I *.tfm
TeX font metrics
.TP 5
.I *.vf
TeX virtual font files
.TP 5
.I *.pfb
PostScript Type 1 font files
.TP 5
.I 
texmf.cnf
The Kpathsea library configuration file.
The location of this file may be found by typing
.nf
.B kpsewhich texmf.cnf
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dvipdft "(1), "
.BR extractbb "(1), "
.BR tex "(1), " dvips "(1), " groff "(1), " grodvi "(1), " pic "(1), "
and the
.I "Kpathsea library"
Info documentation (http://tug.org/kpathsea).
.SH AUTHOR
Primarily Mark A. Wicks; dvipdfmx extensions primarily by Jin-Hwan Cho,
Shunsaku Hirata, and Matthias Franz.  For the version in TeX Live, all
bugs and other reports should go to the
.B dvipdfmx
maintainers at tex-k (at) tug.org.  This man page edited for TeX Live
by Bob Tennent and others.
